All right.
Good morning.
Welcome to session 419,
whose official title is
Best Practices in Website Development,
but whose unofficial and, I think,
more interesting title is
Building Visually Compelling
Webpages for Safari,
as well as other WebKit applications.
All right.
Good morning.
Welcome to session 419,
whose official title is
Best Practices in Website Development,
but whose unofficial and, I think,
more interesting title is
Building Visually Compelling
Webpages for Safari,
as well as other WebKit applications.
So who are the primary
consumers of WebKit technology?
Well, the first and most obvious target
audience is the website author.
So in the first portion of the talk,
I'm going to be outlining some best
practices in website development
that you can use when designing
websites that you want to work
in as many browsers as possible.
In addition,
some of you may be developing
applications that use WebKit and may
be interested to learn what kinds of
things you can do when you're free
of the cross browser constraint.
And then finally,
some of you may have come from the
dashboard session earlier this morning
and may be interested in learning what
kinds of tips and tricks you can use
to make your widgets look really cool.
So towards the end of the talk,
I'll be covering some of the
WebKit-specific enhancements that
we've made that you can take advantage
of when building your widgets.
So what I'm going to cover in order,
I'm going to start by
talking about web standards,
what they are,
and why it's so important to
adhere to them when designing
websites for deployment in
multiple browser environments.
Next, I'm going to talk about
how to use standards well,
in particular,
how to use CSS to separate the
presentation of your website
from your website structure.
And I'm going to demonstrate how
doing so will result in smaller,
faster,
and more easily maintainable websites.
Then I'm going to get into some
technical details and cover
some basic styling techniques,
modern CSS techniques that
work in most browsers.
And then I'm also going
to cover some cutting edge
techniques that work in WebKit,
but that more importantly also
degrade gracefully in browsers
that don't support those features.
And then finally,
I'm going to cover some of the extensions
that we've made to WebKit for you widget
authors and WebKit app developers.
So what are web standards and
why are they so important?
Well, web standards are a set of
recommendations released by an
organization called the W3C.
And what web standards define are
the rules that browsers should use
that they should adhere to when
they're parsing and rendering HTML.
And the reason these standards are so
important is they basically provide a way
of ensuring interoperability among all of
the browsers that support the standards.
So the idea is that you can write
once and expect your code to work,
just work, on all of the browsers that
support those standards.
Now, an added benefit of standards is
you'll find that if you use them well,
you're going to end up with smaller and
faster web pages in all modern browsers.
So the most obvious and
well-known specification,
of course, is HTML,
the primary language of the web today.
But in order to achieve richer
presentational capabilities in HTML,
as well as to achieve more dynamic
effects or more complex behavior,
there are some other specifications
that you should be familiar with.
And the first of these is CSS,
or Cascading Style Sheets.
And what CSS is is a language
separate from HTML but includable
in HTML files that defines rules
for how to define the look of your
website or the theme of your website.
So you can do things
like set the font color,
size, weight, set background and
foreground colors and images.
And you can define the
entire layout of your page,
as well,
where elements go and how big they are.
And this is a spec that's
been around for a while,
nearly 10 years.
And the first version of it, CSS1,
is actually very well-supported
in all modern browsers.
Now, a second revision was
released a few years later.
And this spec actually added
a lot of cool new features.
But unfortunately, there were a lot of
ambiguities in the spec,
a lot of holes.
So when browser makers tried
to implement this spec,
they ran into issues of having
to fill in gaps in the spec.
And so there were interoperability
problems as browsers made different
choices in their interpretations.
So that led the CSS Working Group to
produce revision 2.1.
And this is the sort
of definitive CSS spec,
if you will.
This cleared up a lot of the ambiguities.
It finally defined how a lot of
the cool new features in CSS2 work.
And it even drops CSS2 features
that no browser maker had
ever bothered to implement.
So if you're looking to
see what Safari supports,
this is the definitive spec to
read to find out how a web kit's
going to behave when you use CSS.
Now, in addition,
CSS3 is in development at the W3C.
And although it's not yet a standard,
Safari actually supports
many CSS3 properties.
And we've added even more--
we've added a lot of support
for CSS3 in the beta in Tiger.
So I'll be covering some of
the highlights of Safari CSS3
support later in the session.
Now, another specification that you
should be familiar with for achieving
dynamic effects in your web page
is the Document Object Model,
or DOM for short.
And what the DOM is is a collection
of APIs that are accessible
both from JavaScript in your
web pages and now also from
Objective-C in the latest WebKit beta.
And this API allows you to walk the
structure of your page as a tree view.
So you can iterate over the nodes in
your page and look at element names,
attribute names and values,
and even query for style information
in the latest WebKit beta.
Now, in addition,
the DOM is not just a read-only API.
It's completely dynamic.
So you can actually change all
of this information on the fly.
So you can append nodes, remove nodes,
change attribute names or values,
or dynamically change style information.
And those effects will take
place in real time as you make
those changes in your web page.
So the DOM is a great way to achieve
very dynamic and complex behavior.
Now, like CSS,
it's been around for a long time.
Before there was even a DOM standard,
there was an informal collection
of APIs that you could use
to do some of these things.
And so that's sort of been
informally known as DOM level zero.
And then over the years,
there have been three
revisions to the DOM spec,
refining the behavior,
adding better traversal mechanisms
and support for custom events.
And in addition,
there are also a lot of popular
DOM extensions that have never
found their way into any standard.
And Safari actually
supports many of those.
Examples are the content editable
attribute to do in-page editing,
as well as methods for querying
for the size and position
of elements on your page.
So I've talked about what the
big three standards are-- DOM,
CSS, and HTML-- and why it's
important to follow them.
Now let's talk for a moment about
how you tell the browser that you
even want to adhere to web standards.
So by default,
if you leave off this special tag
that you can put at the top of a
document called a doc type tag,
the browser is going to assume that
you're sort of an old-style web page,
that you're a legacy page,
and that you aren't really
supporting modern standards.
And what browsers are going to do
is they're going to go into their
essentially worst mode of rendering,
a compatibility or quirks mode.
And what you're going to find if
you leave this doc type off in
your web pages is that the various
quirks in the browsers actually
are not going to be the same.
Some browsers are much
quirkier than others.
So what you'll find is that you may
test in one browser and inadvertently
trigger quirks that you didn't
even know about in another browser.
So by putting this doc type in your
web pages up front and most importantly
specifying a modern version of HTML,
specifically HTML 4 or
higher or XHTML 1 or higher,
you're going to let the browser know that
you're a modern standards-compliant page,
and you're going to trigger the
browser's strictest mode of rendering.
And this is really important because
all of the browsers will go into
strict mode with this sort of doc type
that I have on the slide behind me.
And when they do so, the rendering of the
browsers differs a lot less.
So this is just something that you can
do to not only make sure that when you
read a spec and then try the feature out,
it actually works the way the spec says,
but it'll also guarantee that your
site will hopefully just work when
you bring it up in browsers that
you never tested it in before.
So let's say you've got this
old-style website that's just HTML,
and you're trying to modernize it,
bring it up to date.
So you've put the doc type
in and triggered strict mode.
Well, one of the things that's going to
happen when you put that doc type in
is the browser's going to get a lot
more draconian in its error handling.
It's going to get a lot less
tolerant of stupid mistakes
that you make in your website.
And so the onus is going to be on
you as the website developer to
check your web page for errors.
And there are online tools
at the W3C called validators
that can do this for you.
And there's both HTML and CSS validators.
And what they do is take your
CSS and HTML files as inputs,
and they'll print out a list,
a nice list of all the errors and
where they occurred in your file.
So they catch things like unclosed quotes
or misbalanced tags or bad tag nesting.
So if you run your site
through a validator,
you can basically ensure that it's
structurally correct and minimize
the number of errors in the page.
Now, the problem is if you don't
do this is you run the risk of
having this error in your page.
And of course,
we wouldn't have a web if browsers just
crashed every time you made an error.
So browsers are going to try to
second guess you and try to figure
out what it was that you really meant.
But there's an infinite number of
errors that you can make in a web page.
And so it's impossible that the
error recovery rules for any two
browsers is going to be the same.
So again,
if you leave these errors in the page,
you run the risk that your site's
going to render differently in the
various browsers as they recover
from your errors in different ways.
So make sure you validate
your code up front.
Now, it's worth noting that validators
can be a bit pedantic as far
as their reporting of errors.
So I'm not going to stand up here
and say that your sites have to be
100% valid according to HTML and CSS.
But you should eliminate the
more egregious errors up front.
Use validators with a
dash of common sense.
And at least make sure you have a
well-formed DOM tree and stuff like that.
On the slide behind me now,
I have documentation links to both
the CSS and the DOM specifications.
So again,
you can go here and look at the DOM level
2 spec to see what Safari supports
and look at the CSS 2.1 spec to get
a feel for what Safari supports in CSS.
And then the validator links are up
here as well for both CSS and markup.
So let's say you've got
this old-style website.
You've now put the doc type
in and triggered strict mode,
and you've run it through a validator,
and you've eliminated all the errors.
So now you have a site that,
technically speaking, is correct.
It's well-formed.
There are no mistakes in it.
But you haven't started
using any CSS yet.
In particular,
all of your look is still achieved
through old-style HTML tags.
Because HTML was around before CSS,
a lot of presentational features
crept into the language before
CSS came into existence.
There's a lot of presentational
tags and attributes whose sole
purpose in HTML is to supply
this presentational information.
And they said nothing about
what your website actually
should be structured like.
They were just there to
achieve an appearance.
And examples of these tags are the font
tag for doing font colors and sizes,
the bold and italic tags,
and then various attributes like
the width and height attribute
and colors and background colors.
Now, why is this presentational
markup bad in your website?
Well.
For one thing,
when you intermingle the presentational
markup with your structural markup,
you're effectively hard
coding your presentation.
If you find that you want to make
any changes to the presentation,
you'll have to get in there with this
intermingled markup and make changes.
And you might inadvertently
introduce a structural error.
And then the opposite is also true.
Maybe you're just wanting to
change your site's structure.
But it's hard to even tell what
the structure is because the
presentational tags are in the way.
And you might even introduce
presentational errors when you're just
trying to change your website structure.
In addition, you can't define multiple
looks for your site.
There's no way to actually effectively
theme your site because the presentation
is mixed in with the markup.
And finally,
this presentational markup is a waste
of bandwidth because frequently you'll
have similar constructs on a web page,
like, for example,
the links in a nav bar.
And maybe you're relying on a
complex appearance with table
cells and images or whatever.
And you end up using a lot of
presentational markup per link.
What happens if you always use
this markup is it'll be duplicated
in every construct on the page.
So, for example,
if you have 10 links in your nav bar,
maybe you have 50 or 60 pieces of
presentational markup that are all
duplicated along with those links.
So this results in really,
really large web pages,
and it's a waste of server bandwidth,
which will cost you money
when running your website.
And of course, this results in inferior
performance in any modern browser
because a web page that's larger,
that has a bigger DOM tree,
is going to take longer to
parse and longer to render.
So to really hammer this point home,
let's actually look at an example.
And the example I've chosen
is a typical weblog article.
And I think a weblog is a
very representative example,
because a prolific blogger might
have as many as 100 of these blog
articles on their front page.
And we're even going to
assume that a blog article is
simpler than they often are.
We're just going to say it has three
pieces of information-- a header,
which is like the title of the article,
a date, which is when it was posted,
and then the content of the article.
And what we want to achieve
is a layout or appearance that
I put up on the slide behind me.
We want a slightly larger,
bold title in a different color.
And then we have a
different font for the date.
And we want the date on the far right,
the title up on the far left,
and then the text of the article
slightly indented and underneath.
So this is the layout we're shooting for.
So let's look at how we might
do this using old-style markup.
So you probably can't even read this,
because there's so much of it.
I mean, it's just a sea of bad markup.
You have table cells used to do spacing.
You have alignment attributes
on the table cells to push
things to the left and right.
We needed multiple tags-- the font
tag and the B tag-- just to make the
header bold and maroon for the title.
And if I hadn't highlighted
the three relevant pieces of
structural information-- the title,
the date, and the text-- it would have
been hard to even see where
they were in this web page.
So if you wanted to make
changes to the structure,
look at how hard it would be.
Because you'd just be messing around
with this sea of presentational markup.
So now let's look at a good example.
In this example,
just ignore the CSS for a second
and look at the HTML and look at
how much easier it is to read.
And look at how what it represents is
exactly the structure of your website.
You can think of your web blog as a
container for a bunch of articles.
Each article is a container
that has exactly three pieces
of information-- a title,
a date, and a body.
And you can see that it's very easy
to locate these pieces of information.
And if you wanted to make
structural changes to your website,
it's fairly trivial if
you move to this model.
And now let's look at the CSS.
So the CSS is where we've put
the presentational information.
So for example,
the title we've put in a different font,
given it a larger font size,
made it bold.
And we've even said where it goes.
We added the float left to say
that it should sit in the far left.
And we did that all with just
one rule that can be used by all
the blog articles on the page.
And you can see that there are similar
single rules for the date and-- the body,
basically,
in achieving the layout that we want.
And these two layouts basically
look exactly the same.
But this one will load about three or
four times faster in a web browser--
in any web browser you try it in.
So a good example, observations.
Well, first of all,
it's just plain easier to read.
If you have to get into either the
presentational side of your website
or the structure of your website,
it'll be a lot easier to read and
therefore a lot easier to maintain.
information is shared.
Because the rules in CSS can be applied
to all of the articles on the page,
you don't have the problem of duplicating
a bunch of presentational markup.
So those single rules
apply to each article,
and that's going to result
in better performance.
Now, even more importantly,
CSS can be reused across
pages on your site.
A typical web blog has archive pages that
have the same look as the front page.
And they can load the same CSS file.
And then the multiple pages
are even sharing information.
So let's say your user browses
to the front page of the blog.
Then the CSS is going to get parsed
and loaded for the front page.
And then the user is going to
start browsing into your archives.
And that same CSS is already ready to go.
So by using CSS to share
this presentational
information even across pages,
you're not only going to improve
the performance of individual pages,
but you're going to improve the
performance of your entire website.
And this is going to result in
significant bandwidth savings for you,
because you're going to load
the presentational information
frequently once for a website
and then share it across pages.
And in addition,
you're going to eliminate all of
this presentational markup that would
otherwise bloat your HTML files.
And of course,
it's going to result in better
performance in any modern browser,
because there's going to be a
lot less work being done by the
browser to render your page.
So what I'm going to show you now is
a demo that's perhaps the ultimate
example on the web today of the
separation of structure and presentation.
So if we can switch to the demo now.
Okay,
so what a web designer named Dave Shea
did is he made a very simple,
basic piece of unstyled markup,
which you can see behind me.
It's just got some headers, you know,
some list items down towards the bottom.
And basically, this started off unstyled.
It almost looks like we're, you know,
we've traveled back in
time to the year 1993,
but not quite.
Ah, there we go.
That's better.
Much more like Mosaic 1.0 now.
All right, so what Dave Shea did
was he made this markup.
And he said he challenged web designers
to produce innovative and creative
designs by styling this markup.
And the restriction that was placed
on all of the web designers was,
you can't change this markup.
You have to take this existing
markup that I made and come
up with a great design for it,
all without being able
to change the HTML.
And the range and variety of designs
that people have been able to produce
using only CSS is just pretty incredible.
and we can show you some of
the better ones right now.
So we start with a newer design
that was posted relatively recently
that's sort of a more basic one.
But you can see nifty examples
like the fixed bar on the left,
a much narrower column,
a lot of interesting use
of background images,
and different fonts.
But you can actually achieve
a lot more radical effects
with the layout than this.
In this next example,
the designer actually took the
headings and the subsections and laid
them out horizontally in columns.
So remember, this is all the same markup.
These web designers are all operating
on the exact same HTML page.
And what this designer did was
actually laid things out horizontally.
But you can get even wackier than that.
In this next design,
the page is laid out like
panels in a comic book.
And so this is the Wiggles
the Wonder Worm design.
And that's actually real
text that you can select.
The text has been positioned
within the panels.
So what you're seeing is a really
clever use of positioning and
background images to achieve a layout
that was just completely different
from the previous ones that I showed.
So now we can go to another design.
And this one contains an
interesting technique that
I'm going to talk about next.
Notice how the headers of the sections,
the text, has gone away,
and what's there instead are images.
So somehow the designer of this page,
of the CSS,
actually managed to get rid of
the text that was in the markup
and put an image there instead.
And this is kind of a
really clever trick.
So what I'm going to do now is
actually talk about how that was done.
So if we can go back to the slides.
So this technique is
called image replacement.
And what image replacement is
is pretty obvious at this point,
having seen the demo.
You basically are taking
text in a web page,
getting rid of it,
and somehow replacing it with an image
that you specified in the CSS file.
And there are a lot of different
ways to accomplish this,
a lot of very sort of clever,
clever hacks that people have come up
with to use CSS to accomplish this.
So I'm going to cover some of them.
And just a reminder,
here's what we're trying to do.
The original unstyled markup
had just an actual header,
an H3 element.
And what we're wanting to do is
actually take that H3 element
and treat it like an image.
So what's the point?
Well, an obvious point, of course,
is multiple themes.
If you have the restriction that
you can't change the markup,
but the semantic meaning
of the markup is header,
what you need to do is somehow get an
image in one design and text in another.
So in order to support multiple
themes with different looks,
this technique is a requirement.
And you also don't have
to change the markup.
If the structural meaning of the markup,
for example, in this file,
those headers are headers.
They're not images.
If you think of the web page
being displayed unstyled,
those are headers of subsections.
So you don't actually want to turn
the markup into image tags because
that's not actually what the structure
of the website really represents.
Now, in addition,
image replacement can actually
save bandwidth because if you
actually have-- say you're using
a blog article example again,
and you have comment
and track back links,
and you want to represent
those as images,
then you might be reusing the
same image 100 times on the page.
And with CSS, you'd only specify the
width and height and URL,
source URL, one time,
whereas with an image tag,
you'd at least have to specify the
source URL over and over again.
So there's actually a minor bandwidth
savings from using image replacement
as well in certain scenarios.
So just a reminder,
the reason we don't want to put an
image tag in there is this is a header.
Semantically, it's a header.
It is not an image.
If we were to throw
an image tag in there,
then now the onus would be on
another designer to hide the
image and put the text back in.
So this is not actually what
we're wanting to achieve.
So we can't change the markup, remember.
So an amusing trait of these
image replacement techniques
is web designers like to throw
their names on them like they're
mathematical theorems or something.
And with this one,
this one wasn't even invented by
the person who it's named after.
In fact,
I'm not even sure who invented it.
I think Todd Farner is notable
for saying that CSS should have
a mechanism for doing this,
a simpler one than all of the
mechanisms that I'm going to show you,
actually.
So this first technique,
the earliest one,
is called Farner Image Replacement,
or FIR for short.
And what it does is it adds an extra span
to the markup in order to hide the text.
So you can see that the H3 header
has had a span placed inside it.
And then what we've done is using CSS,
we've set the display to none,
which effectively hides the text
and makes it not be rendered at all.
And then what we've done is taken
the header itself and changed
its width and height to match the
width and height of the image.
And then we just have put the image in
as a background image on the header.
So basically we ditch the text,
resize the header,
and put a background image on it to
just make it look like just the image.
So that's the trick.
Now there's, of course,
a very obvious problem
with this technique.
I just preached that we didn't want to
pollute the markup with unneeded tags
whose sole purpose was for presentation.
And that's what we just did.
So a problem with this technique
is it pollutes the markup with that
span that you really shouldn't need.
It's also not accessible
to screen readers.
Because Display None is used to actually
just get rid of the text completely,
accessibility devices like screen
readers won't be able to find the text,
and they won't be able to speak it aloud.
And then in addition,
this technique doesn't work
in browsers that support the
ability to turn images off.
Because if the image turns off,
all you've done is made the background
image of this header go away,
and the text is still gone.
You've still hidden the text.
So if you turn images off,
you just won't see anything.
So ideally,
what you'd like is a technique
that actually shows you the text
again when you turn the images off.
So here's another second amusingly
named image replacement technique,
FARC image replacement.
And this one-- Is that his real name?
What was that?
Is that his real name?
That is his real name.
OK.
And what FargImage Replacement does
is actually manages to get rid of
the span with another clever hack.
And like the other replacement technique,
it sizes the header to the width
and height of the image and puts
it down as a background image.
But what it does with the
text is instead of hiding it,
it uses a CSS property
called text indent.
And you would think that you'd
be shoving the text to the right,
but for some reason what the hack
does is shoves the text to the left.
Very, very, very far to the left.
Negative 5,000 pixels, in fact.
And what that does is basically
makes the text render way,
way, way off to the left, off-screen.
But then furthermore, you can add this
overflow hidden property,
which tells browsers to clip
anything that's outside your box.
So what happens is the text gets shoved
way out to the left and then clipped.
So the nice thing about this
technique is it avoids having
an extra span in the markup.
And this one works with screen readers.
Because the text is still there,
just shoved way off
into a wacky position,
the screen reader can still find it,
and therefore it can still speak it.
So the nice thing about this
technique is it avoids having
an extra span in the markup.
And this one works with screen readers.
Because the text is still there,
just shoved way off
into a wacky position,
the screen reader can still find it,
and therefore it can still speak it.
So this one is similar to the FARC one,
but will work with images off.
And the way it does this is instead of
shoving the text far out to the left
and instead of using a background image,
what it does instead is creates
a piece of generated content.
This is a feature of CSS 2.1.
And so this generated content is done
using the second rule on the slide.
And so by making an actual image
as a piece of content that actually
gets put inside the header,
when you turn images off,
that content will go away and
the text will get pulled back up.
So the idea was to make the image
sort of participate in layout and
actually go away-- when it goes away,
actually have it affect
the layout of the text.
So this example will work in Safari,
Mozilla, and Opera, I believe,
in the latest versions.
And it avoids having an
extra span in the markup,
works with images off,
and works with screen readers.
So another neat technique that is used
on the Zingarden site that I'm going to
cover is the sliding doors technique.
Now, this is a neat CSS trick for
making tabbed user interfaces.
You can also use it to make rounded,
for example, Aqua-style buttons.
And the idea is to make these elements
such that they still have foreground
text that you could select conceivably
or that's actual text that's
accessible to screen readers as well.
So these tabs can also
participate in text zoom as well.
And this technique was
invented by a web designer,
Doug Bowman.
And you can read much more about
this technique on a list of part.com.
And so I've got an image up here
that is the layout that we're going
to try to achieve just using CSS.
So we're going to start with some markup.
We're just going to start with
a unordered list of links.
And we're going to take
that simple unordered list,
and we're going to turn
it into a set of tabs.
So these are just like the links that
you might have in a typical nav bar going
to various subsections of your website.
So the concept is that each tab is
going to use two background images,
one on the list item and
one on the anchor that was
inside the list item markup.
And the idea is like sliding doors,
the images are going
to go over one another.
And the narrower the space,
the more the two images are
going to actually overlap.
And then the wider the text on the tab,
the less the images will overlap.
So you can see this idea
with some images here.
Now, on the images on the left,
you can sort of see the
concept of overlapping.
You know, the narrower the text,
smaller the text,
the more they'll overlap.
And then the wider the text, the less.
And in the images on the right,
what we're doing is
using background images.
And background images are always only
drawn within your element's bounds.
So the idea is that you make these
really large background images,
and you'll just expose more and
more of them in sort of the visible
doorway as you do text zoom or
as you have wider or taller text.
So the idea,
the easy way to do this is to make the
left image narrow and then have the right
image be the rest of the background.
So you sort of do the left
edge that you want to achieve,
and then all of the rest,
the right edge plus
your background pattern,
goes into the second image.
So you can see how you can use this
technique to do aqua-style buttons
or sort of rounded buttons as well.
And the idea is that the right
image is going to be the one that
slides behind the left image.
And that'll just happen naturally
by virtue of the fact that the
anchor is a child of the list item.
Or sorry, that the-- yeah, exactly.
And then the wider the tab,
the less the two images will overlap.
And you want your images to be
tall enough to accommodate the
maximal text zoom in browsers,
which is typically about 300%.
And then you want the right image
to be wide enough to accommodate
the degree-- you always want the
two images to at least overlap.
So your background image should be wide
enough to accommodate the maximal width
of text you're going to put on the tab.
So here's a lot of CSS that sort of
just is housekeeping to set up the
lists as objects that sit horizontally
and don't have bullets anymore.
And the relevant piece for the sliding
door technique is the background URL.
So you can see with the background URL,
what we've done is specified the image.
And we've also said the
image should not be tiled,
because we don't want
it to repeat itself.
And for the list item,
the image should be anchored
at the right and the top.
So you can think of it as
being anchored on the right and
then spilling out to the left.
And those of you with high-powered
binoculars in the audience can take a
look at what we have so far on the slide.
So now we add the second
image to the anchors.
And this is like the other one,
only we're going to anchor it
to the left and to the top,
and also set it to not repeat.
Because remember, this image is narrow,
so we don't want it tiling
on top of the right image.
And so the anchor has this left image,
and it's going to slide over the
background image of the list item.
And once we add this rule,
what we have now looks
very much like tabs.
And so now what we're going
to do is switch to a demo and
show you these tabs in action,
so you can see what they look like.
So what you can do is zoom the tabs.
We can see that they work with text zoom.
And one thing that we're
missing is we don't really
have a notion of a current tab.
All the tabs look the
same when in reality,
you know,
you're always on some particular
subsection of the site.
So we can show you how you can use
the sliding doors trick to actually
add the notion of a current tab.
And what you can see is you
can basically add rules that,
again,
just use the sliding doors technique
to add a different set of background
images for the Current tab.
And when we do that--
And what you can see is you
can basically add rules that,
again,
just use the sliding doors technique
to add a different set of background
images for the Current tab.
So that's sliding doors.
It's a very, very simple technique.
Now in addition,
what we can do is-- I'm going to put in
a shameless plug for HTML editing here.
So what we're going to do is actually
demonstrate content editable and show
how we can actually edit the current tab.
And again,
this is sort of just demonstrating
that it's all a dynamic layout and that
everything will flow as you're editing.
All right,
so now we can go back to the slides.
So the CSS in Garden is a great site.
I encourage you to check it out.
Here is the URL that you can go to.
And there are hundreds of
designs there at this point.
And it's basically-- especially if you're
wanting to design dashboard widgets,
look at these, study this stuff.
Because all of these creative techniques,
all of these things
that these designers do,
you can do in your dashboard widgets.
So check it out.
In addition, there's a great website
called a listapart.com.
It's essentially an online magazine that
regularly publishes articles on CSS.
And that's where the content of this
sliding doors section came from.
And since the first
sliding doors article,
Doug Bowman's actually
even published a follow-up.
So I highly encourage you to
check out a listapart.com and
learn more about this technique.
So now that we've talked about
more basic styling techniques
that work in all browsers,
let's start getting towards the edge
of standards and talk about some cool
CSS3 stuff that you can really use
in WebKit to spice up your web pages.
Now, one that's become quite popular on
the web since we introduced it in
Safari 1.2 is the text shadow property.
And this property was
actually originally in CSS2.
No one implemented it,
except Safari got it in right
before CSS2.1 became a standard.
But unfortunately,
it was not in time for them
to actually put it back in.
So it'll be returning in CSS3.
So I'm effectively going to
consider it a CSS3 property,
despite it having been
around for a while.
But what it does is lets you add
really neat shadow effects to text.
And a shadow consists of three
components-- the color of the
shadow text that's going to
be behind the regular text,
an offset, which represents the distance,
the x and y distance of the
shadow from the original text,
and then a blur radius,
which is sort of a fuzz or distortion
that you can apply to the shadow.
And the higher the blur radius,
the more diffuse the shadow will be.
So here's a nifty text shadow
example that's showing one
trick you can do with shadows.
This is an eclipse effect.
And what I've done is made a
red text shadow on the body,
offset by four pixels,
and then with a small blur radius.
And the foreground text is black,
and the background text is black.
But because there's a shadow,
you get this sort of eclipse effect
where the text is readable because
the shadow is what's drawing.
So this is just one of the nifty
creative uses of text shadow.
You can also use it more traditionally
in text where the foreground color
does not match the background.
But this is a really great,
simple declarative way to make
text look better in your web pages.
And if a browser doesn't support it,
no harm's done.
It'll degrade gracefully.
Another great CSS3 feature that
Safari has rich support for is
transparency and transparency effects.
Now, this is basically the ability
to make elements in your page
partially transparent so that
you can see what's behind them.
Now, there is currently a cross-browser
way of achieving this,
and by cross-browser I mean in every
modern browser except for WinIE.
And this is,
you can do this with transparent pings,
which are images that can
incorporate alpha channels.
And so that's a way of -- that's
a safe way -- I should just say
that up front -- that's a way of
at least achieving transparency
that will work in more browsers.
Now,
there's some more lightweight mechanisms,
though, that can prevent you from
having to make images just to
achieve transparent effects.
I'm going to talk about two of those.
One is RGBA colors,
and the second is opacity.
So RGBA colors are basically just a
color specified as four components,
a red, green, and blue component,
and then additionally an alpha value.
And the syntax looks kind
of like a function in CSS.
You basically say RGBA, parentheses,
and then in a comma-separated list,
you enter the red, green,
and blue values and the alpha.
And the RGB values range from 0 to 255,
but the alpha value goes from 0 to 1.0,
with 1.0 being fully opaque
and 0 being fully transparent.
So if you make the
object fully transparent,
you won't see it at all.
So here are some examples of RGBA colors.
And I've basically put this up
here to demonstrate that everywhere
you can use a color in CSS,
in WebKit,
you can use these transparent colors.
So this is a great way to apply
transparency only to particular
portions of your content.
In particular,
you can make the foreground
text red and 50% opaque.
Or maybe you want to make only your
borders transparent while the rest of
your element remains non-transparent.
Maybe you have a border and you want the
background to show up behind the border.
So that's a nifty visual effect you can
achieve by using transparent borders.
In addition,
you can make a background transparent.
Just use a transparent background color
to get the content behind to show up.
And then finally,
you can even use opacity
with text shadow.
So you can actually make the
shadow itself even be transparent.
But the really cool
CSS3 feature is Opacity.
And Opacity is a way to
basically make your element,
all its descendants,
all be transparent as a unit.
So background borders and your
children all can become partially
transparent with one simple declaration.
So for example, if you wanted to make all
of your articles 30% opaque,
this is all you'd have to do.
It's just a single property with a
value that ranges between 0 and 1,
just like the alpha
value in the RGBA colors.
So now what I'm going to show you,
we spent a lot of time talking about CSS,
so now let's combine this with the DOM.
I talked earlier about how
the DOM was a great mechanism
for achieving dynamic effects.
So what we can actually do is
take the support for opacity in
modern browsers and use DOM and
JavaScript to create fade effects
when switching between our sliding
doors tabs in the previous example.
And what's even better is we can
write this to degrade gracefully in
those browsers that are unfortunate
enough not to support opacity.
And this example I'm about to
show you works in both Safari and
in the latest Mozilla 1.7.
So let's walk through how
we add these fade effects.
Well, the first thing we want to do is
add a handler to the links such
that when you click the link,
we're going to call a
function to begin our fade,
to begin our fade out.
So that's just done with a simple
onClick handler attached to the links.
And what we're going to do is assume that
the content of the web page underneath
the tabs is in a div whose ID is content.
And that's what we're going to operate
on as we do the fade out effect.
So what we have here is first
we decided the fade is not
going to be interruptible.
So we're going to track that
with a fade in progress Boolean.
And if that's already true when
the user clicks on a link for,
say, a second time,
we'll just return false,
which indicates to browsers that
you shouldn't follow the link.
So that'll basically ensure that
if a fade out is in progress,
we don't stop it and start it
again and visually stutter.
And then what we're going
to do is actually a check,
basically a check to see if
the browser supports opacity.
So what we do is we get
our content element,
and we just try to set its
opacity to be fully opaque.
and if that fails,
essentially if we then query
for the style that we set and
we get the empty string back,
we can return true, follow the link,
and assume that opacity is not supported.
But if you're using Safari in Mozilla,
we can keep going.
So what we then do is set
the fade in progress to true.
And we set a timeout to continue the
fade with a 25 millisecond value.
So what this means is
we'll get a callback very,
very shortly that will allow us
to start doing the dynamic effect.
And another minor note here is we've
also made this slick enough that if
the user changes his or her mind about
what anchor they wanted to click on,
if the fade's in progress,
note that we update the
current anchor always.
So that always ensures that the
fade effect will just continue,
and then you'll always go to the
last anchor that the user clicked.
And now, finally,
we return false to indicate that we
can't follow the link yet because we're
going to be doing the fade-out effect.
So now let's look at the
continue fade function.
So this is very simple.
We start off with our
current opacity at 1.
We're going to decide that we're going
to fade out in basically 2% increments.
So we subtract 2% from
the opacity effectively.
And if this puts us below 0,
at or below 0, we're done.
So we set our Windows current
location to be the href of the anchor,
the last anchor that the user clicked.
[Transcript missing]
And then we set a timeout
to keep continuing the fade.
So we'll just keep getting called
back and fading out further and
further until we're finished.
So now let's see a demo of
this fade effect in action.
So what you can see here is we've
got the same sliding door tabs,
but now when you click on the home link,
you'll see this really
neat fade-out effect.
And then if you click
back on the news link,
again, you see.
So very, very slick, very, very simple,
and it just adds some visual
spice to the web page.
And a user in a browser that
doesn't support Opacity will
never know that it wasn't there.
All right,
so we can go back to the slides.
So here's another new CSS3
property that we now support
as of the latest WebKit beta,
and that's support for text truncation.
So instead of clipping text
when it spills outside of a box,
we can actually now render
an ellipsis instead.
And this is done with a new CSS3
property called TextOverflow.
And TextOverflow takes two values,
clip and ellipsis.
So clip is essentially
the default behavior,
but you can actually change
this to ellipsis to achieve
the truncation effect.
And the basic idea,
the common way that you'll
use this sort of thing is when
you have single line headers,
or maybe even URLs-- URLs are
another good example-- where you
would like them to stay on one line.
And you don't want to have some
ugly visual rendering where they
spill over the rest of your content.
So what you do-- there's basically
three very relevant properties here,
not just text overflow.
For one thing,
you could already have done
overflow hidden to make sure that,
say, a long URL was clipped so that
it didn't paint on top of other
content that you didn't want it to.
So that's a good thing
to just do in general,
like, say,
with the content section of a website,
to keep the things in the
content from spilling out onto,
say, your blog roll or your sidebars.
[Transcript missing]
So I've covered basic styling
techniques and then even gotten into
cutting edge techniques in CSS3.
Now let's sort of leap into the realm of
dashboard and WebKit and see what we've
done that's gone beyond the standards.
So one thing that we've done
is we've added two new form
controls that you can use.
And those are sliders and search fields.
And we've exposed those as
form controls in a web page.
Just like all the other form controls,
they can be submitted,
their values can be queried and set.
And this gives you richer
widget capabilities.
In addition, I encourage you to attend
the WebKit session tomorrow,
where Richard Williamson will be
covering the advanced graphics effects
that we've added for Dashboard.
And those include image compositing,
where we've added a new composite
attribute to the image element to
allow you to achieve more advanced
compositing effects with images.
And in addition,
we've added a new canvas element to
HTML that lets you do programmatic
two-dimensional drawing,
like lines and fills.
In addition,
there's a lot of new advanced
layout capabilities in Safari.
It has a complete spring and strut
implementation that's also implemented
by Mozilla that allows you to achieve
a lot of layouts that are currently not
achievable in CSS and that are considered
quite difficult by web designers,
like the ability to easily center
elements in the center of a viewport.
In addition,
there's a lot of new advanced
layout capabilities in Safari.
It has a complete spring and strut
implementation that's also implemented
by Mozilla that allows you to achieve
a lot of layouts that are currently not
achievable in CSS and that are considered
quite difficult by web designers,
like the ability to easily center
elements in the center of a viewport.
And finally, the big feature of
WebKit is HTML editing.
And that includes both editing of entire
web views from WebKit applications
and the ability to do in-page web
editing using Content Editable.
So to find out all about HTML editing,
I highly encourage you attend
the talk that's vaguely named
Advanced WebKit Features on Friday.
That talk's actually going
to be all about HTML editing,
as well as showing you how to
use the DOM API from Objective-C.
So let's cover some of
these new form controls.
So the way you do a slider is
with input type equals range.
So that's all you have to
do to introduce a slider.
Whether or not it will be horizontal
or vertical will depend on whether
you make the width or height larger.
Which dimension is larger will
control the orientation of the slider.
There are attributes called min and
max that set the range of the slider.
There's a precision attribute that
allows you to specify whether you
want the slider to report float
values by default or integer.
If you basically make it
report integer values,
it'll always lock to an integer value,
even though you're doing
continuous slider dragging.
And then, of course,
the value attribute that nearly all
of the form controls support can be
used to query for the value and set it.
And this slider can participate in form
submission by submitting its value.
In addition,
we've added support for the input event.
This is an event also
supported by Mozilla.
And we've added it not only
to sliders but to text fields.
And this event fires
immediately when you're typing.
And for sliders, it fires immediately
when you're dragging.
So the basic idea behind this new input
event is if you want to have things
happen live or in real time immediately,
this is the event you want to use.
And so for sliders,
it'll fire whenever the value changes,
for any reason.
So here's a great,
really tiny slider example
that sets the opacity.
So here we have a slider,
a floating slider,
that goes between 0 and 1.0.
Remember, 1.0 is fully opaque.
0 is fully transparent.
It will say it starts off
at 0.5 right in the middle.
And we have an onInput handler
that grabs the content div from
the previous example and just sets
the opacity to the current value.
So it's that simple.
And if you were to put this in your
web page and the user were to drag it,
you'd You'd have a neat
dynamic transparency effect.
So another cool widget we
introduced is the search field.
And this is basically just a HTML way
of getting to the functionality
of a Cocoa in a search field.
So this is done with
input type equals search.
The incremental attribute
controls live searching.
You just have to put that attribute
with no value into your HTML,
and the control will be live.
There's a results attribute
that you set to the number of
results you want to remember,
and that will remember previous searches.
In addition,
you can give an autosave name with
an autosave attribute that tells--
basically is an identifier that's used
to store the results of the search.
And what's neat about this
is you can even say something
like autosave equals Google,
throw this thing on your website,
and everybody who wants to
implement a Google search field
can use a common autosave name,
and all of those results will actually
be shared among those search fields.
The placeholder attribute is
used to control the grayed-out
text that you see in the search
field before you begin a search.
And then finally, there's a new event.
Because the NSSearch field has a
rather complicated heuristic that
it uses for determining at what
time you should begin the search,
rather than force you to put in
key handlers and click handlers
and all of that garbage,
you can just listen for a search event,
and it will fire exactly
when it's supposed to,
making it easier for you to implement.
And it just fires exactly when
you're supposed to perform a search,
and you can do whatever
it is you'd like to do.
What's really kind of nifty about this
that may make it interesting to use
on websites is that an unrecognized
input type actually results in
a text field in other browsers.
So that means that you can actually
use a search field if you just want
to get the different look with,
say, storing results using a
magnifying glass icon.
If you maybe just want to
achieve that different look,
you can safely use this in a web page,
because other browsers will
still show a text field.
So this degrades gracefully in other
browsers that don't support it.
And here's just a very simple example
of a search field that's incremental,
so it's live, with a little placeholder
string that says,
click here to search,
and then some action
that you would perform.
An example is, of course,
that we'll show in a minute,
is the dashboard widget
for searching address book.
So let's put it all together with
these enhancements and sort of start
looking at the Safari RSS feature as
well as dashboard from the perspective
of this is just an HTML page with
some slick new features in it.
So what we can do is start
by going to an RSS feed.
And what you can see here is
there's some truncation in action.
If you resize the window to be really,
really small or just zoom the text,
you can see that the headers in the
Safari RSS actually are truncating.
And they're just doing that
with the text overflow property.
This is just a web page that's
been generated by the RSS engine.
And in addition,
there's some very complex
layout at work here.
There's a spring and strut
layout on the header and date,
as well as to do the vertical
stacking of the articles and
to participate in the slider.
So you can see there's a
slider widget up there.
If you drag it,
there's a really neat dynamic
effect that can be achieved.
And note that it's actually
a fairly speedy effect.
And you can do everything that
this page is doing you can do.
This is all open.
This is all there in
WebKit for you to use.
And so now what we can do is
actually look at a dashboard.
So we can bring up dashboard.
And we can show,
let's demo drag and drop.
So if you drag the
address book out slowly,
note how the drag image started
off as the address book and
then we dynamically updated it.
And we even did a fade as
we dynamically updated it.
So the drag image for the
widget actually slowly faded in.
And then when you drop it, of course,
you get the whizzy ripple effect.
And you can see the,
this is just an HTML page.
And you can see the search field,
input type equals search
in the bottom right.
And you can type things like last name.
And you can even click on the
magnifying glass and you'll see,
hit enter.
Oh.
Bug.
There you go.
And you'll see that it will
start storing results for you.
It's incremental.
So all of this is very straightforward,
very simple, very easy to use.
And so back to slides.
[Transcript missing]